docs: backup and restore specification (#1610)
oras-project/oras: docs/proposals/backup-restore.md

> # Backup and Restore Commands

Author: Added.

> This document describes how the backup and restore commands will work and how the feature will be rolled out.

Author: Added something in a new paragraph above this.

> This document describes how the backup and restore commands will work and how the feature will be rolled out.

Reviewer: Well, other reviewers may have some fundamental questions like @sabre1041 asked above. 
I guess we may need an enhancement proposal doc template to structure the content and make sure necessary background/scenarios of each proposal are included.

> This document describes how the backup and restore commands will work and how the feature will be rolled out.

Reviewer: https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1621

> This document describes how the backup and restore commands will work and how the feature will be rolled out.

Author: Done

The proposal is to create the feature as a minimum viable product and follow that up with non breaking features to the commands.
The initial implementation will be the easiest implementation that is useful.

## Minium Viable Product

The backup command will initially just support writing to a directory and the restore command will only support reading from a directory.

### oras backup

> The backup command will initially only support reading a list of files from the command line and writing to a directory:

Author: Fixed

```bash

> oras backup --output ./mirror  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0

Author: Initially, there will be no output to stdout.

The command above puts the OCI layout for the Kubernetes API server in `mirror/kube-api-server-arm64`.
The directory structure with intermediate blobs removed:

```bash
$ find mirror
mirror
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/ingest
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/oci-layout
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256/3f4e2c5863480125882d92060440a5250766bce764fee10acdbac18c872e4dc7
...
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256/4f80fb2b9442dbecd41e68b598533dcaaf58f9d45cce2e03a715499aa9f6b676
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/index.json
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/ingest
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/oci-layout
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256/3f4e2c5863480125882d92060440a5250766bce764fee10acdbac18c872e4dc7
...
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256/4f80fb2b9442dbecd41e68b598533dcaaf58f9d45cce2e03a715499aa9f6b676
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/index.json
$
```

> The directory `mirror` must exist for the initial feature.

Author: I was thinking not for the initial release because later we want to support writing to a tgz file and this will help differentiate file output vs directory output. Some option could be added later.

Each image will be stored in a subdirectory which matches the repository name.

### oras restore

Initially, the restore command will only support reading a directory and writing to a registry:

```bash

> oras restore --input ./mirror localhost:15000/my-mirror

Author: Yes, all the normal registry flags. I added some text about that.

```

The above backup example would result in:
```bash
localhost:15000/my-mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0
localhost:15000/my-mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0
```

A namespace in the registry will be optional.
The registry in the above example could be specified as `localhost:15000`.

Any directory in the input that does not contain an `index.json` shall be silently ignored.

## Compressed Tar File Support

> After the command supports directory write and read, support will be added for write and read to a compressed tar file.

Reviewer 2: Is this trying to state that future enhancements after the initial release will add support for compressed archives?

Author: Yes.

The directory structure in the tar file would be the same as in the directory output.

```bash
oras backup --output ./mirror.tgz  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0
```

There will be no validation on file name.
The file name does not need to end in `tgz`, but the format will be compressed tar file.
If the file exists, it will be overwritten.

```bash
oras restore --input ./mirror.tgz localhost:15000/my-mirror
```
If the specified source is a file, the format is assumed to be a compressed tar file.

## Backup file input from a file

> The backup command will support an `--input filename` argument which will be a file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The backup command will support an `--input filename` argument which will be a file containing the remove resources to retrieve.
```

The format of the contents of the file is a list of images names separated by newlines.
If the `--input` argument is specified, no images may be specified on the command line.

## Backup file input from standard input

The backup command will support the `--input -` argument to read a list of images from standard input.
The format of the input is a list of images names separated by newlines.

## Restore file input from standard input

The restore command will support the `--input -` argument to read a compressed tar input from standard input.

## Optimize blobs

> Add the feature to create blobs that are duplicated between images as hard links in the directory output and compressed tar files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A further enhancement is to create blobs that are duplicated between images as hard links in the directory output and compressed tar files.
```

> # Backup and Restore Commands

Reviewer: @TerryHowe Would you mind restructure this proposal doc based on the ORAS Enhancement Proposal Template? That would makes this proposal more informative and improves clarity https://github.com/oras-project/oras/blob/main/docs/proposals/proposal-doc-template.md

# ORAS Backup and Restore Commands

The backup and restore commands will add the capability to backup a list of artifacts from a registry and restore them to another registry.
Backup and restore will be support for any OCI compatible artifact (e.g. container images, helm charts, configuration files,...).

## Overview 

> This document outlines the different ways that the ORAS backup and restore commands can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document outlines various scenarios related to backing up and restoring OCI images from registries and local files. It covers a common workflow for downloading and uploading one or more image resources to and from disk, identifies limitations and challenges in existing solutions, and presents proposals for improvements to enhance usability and portability of managing OCI images.
```

Air gapped environments normally require users to copy many artifiacts to a portable storage medium and sneaker net that storage into the environment.
The backup and restore commands will make writing that portable storage medium easy.

The backup and restore commands will also help users wanting to copy artifiacts from a registry for disaster recovery.
It may be significantly easier to restore a registy from a backup rather than recreate the artifacts.

## Existing Solutions or Expectations

This functionality is similar, but more flexible than `docker save` and `docker load`.
The Docker commands only allow the use of a tar file.

## Proposal 

The backup and restore commands will support reading and writing multiple files to and from a registry.
As well as the flags described here, the commands will support the normal set of flags to support TLS and authentication.

### oras backup

The backup command will read a list of atifacts from the command line or from standard input.
It will support writing to a directory or compressed tar file.

For example, backing up artifacts specified on the command line to a directory:

```bash

> oras backup --output ./mirror  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0

Author: Added a note about this in the document

> oras backup --output ./mirror  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0

Author: Done

> oras backup --output ./mirror  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0

Author: Done.

The command above puts the OCI layout for the Kubernetes API server in `mirror/kube-api-server-arm64`.
The directory structure with intermediate blobs removed:

```bash
$ find mirror
mirror
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/ingest
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/oci-layout
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256/3f4e2c5863480125882d92060440a5250766bce764fee10acdbac18c872e4dc7
...
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/blobs/sha256/4f80fb2b9442dbecd41e68b598533dcaaf58f9d45cce2e03a715499aa9f6b676
mirror/kube-apiserver-arm64/index.json
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/ingest
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/oci-layout
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256/3f4e2c5863480125882d92060440a5250766bce764fee10acdbac18c872e4dc7
...
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/blobs/sha256/4f80fb2b9442dbecd41e68b598533dcaaf58f9d45cce2e03a715499aa9f6b676
mirror/kube-controller-manager-arm64/index.json
$
```

> Each image will be stored in a subdirectory which matches the repository name.

Author: To keep the backup registry agnostic, I think the tags would be better as `bar:v1` for example, just the repository

The backup command will also have the ability to write output to a new compressed tar file where the contents are in oci-layout
format. For example:

```bash
oras backup --output ./mirror.tgz  registry.k8s.io/kube-apiserver-arm64:v1.31.0 registry.k8s.io/kube-controller-manager-arm64:v1.31.0
```

There will be no validation on file name.
The file name does not need to end in `tgz`, but the format will be compressed tar file.

> If the file exists, it will be overwritten.

Author: As the document states currently "There will be no validation on file name." If you want to output to a directory, it must exist. If it does not exist, a file will be written.

> If the file exists, it will be overwritten.

Author: I've changed the wording here which I hope clarifies the output.

#### Backup file input from a file

The backup command will support an `--input filename` argument which will be a file containing the remote resources to retrieve.
The format of the contents of the file is a list of images names separated by newlines.

> If the `--input` argument is specified, no images may be specified on the command line.

Author: The input in this case would be a list of files instead of using arguments on the command line. Maybe I misspoke iin another comment

> If the `--input` argument is specified, no images may be specified on the command line.

Reviewer: I am also confused about the proposal of "Backup file input from a file". ORAS is positioned as a registry client, it makes sense to keep the scope with backup images from a registy to local filesystem.

> If the `--input` argument is specified, no images may be specified on the command line.

Author: I'll just delete this option since everyone seems to find it confusing.

#### Backup file input from standard input

The backup command will support the `--input -` argument to read a list of images from standard input.
The format of the input is a list of images names separated by newlines.

#### Optimize blobs

> A further enhancement is to create blobs that are duplicated between images as hard links in the directory output and compressed tar files.

Author: I was planning recreating the oci-layouts to represent the repository names. Do you think it would be a better approach to create one huge oci-layout? would there be limitations to that in the index.json?

> A further enhancement is to create blobs that are duplicated between images as hard links in the directory output and compressed tar files.

Author: I'm going to resolve this and we can discuss more on https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1610/files#r2150472952

### oras restore

> The restore command will support reading a directory or a compressed tar file and writing the content to a remote registry.

Author: I don't want to get into randomly renaming repositories during restore, but I like the idea of supporting changing namespace which I think it what you are suggesting.

> The restore command will support reading a directory or a compressed tar file and writing the content to a remote registry.

Author: I've added a couple sentences below this to address these concerns.

#### Restore from a directory

An example of restoring from a directory:

```bash

> oras restore --input ./mirror localhost:15000/my-mirror

Author: The --input flag here is mostly to align with the backup command --output flag

> oras restore --input ./mirror localhost:15000/my-mirror

Author: I added a sentence saying the `--input` flag is required.

## Existing Solutions or Expectations

* `docker save/load` supports exporting and importing images but not referrers or OCI artifacts.
* `oras pull/push` handles single artifacts, but not repository-level operations.
* There is no built-in way to persist multiple artifacts in OCI layout format via `oras`.

This proposal meets user expectations of portability, structure, and artifact completeness using OCI specifications.

## Proposal

### New Commands/Parameters in the CLI

#### Command: `oras backup`

**Short summary:**
Backup OCI artifacts and repositories from a registry into a structured, portable OCI image layout or archive tarball file locally.

**Syntax:**
```bash
oras backup [flags] <registry>/<repository>[:<ref1>[,<ref2>...]] [...]
```

**Output:**
An OCI image layout directory or `.tar` archive containing the images, artifacts, their metadata, and optional referrers.

**New Flags:**

* `--include-referrers`: Back up the image and its linked referrers (e.g., attestations, SBOMs).
* `--output <path>`: Optional, target file path or archive file to write in local filesystem. 

> Note: 

> > - If the flag `--output` is not specified, the default output directory is set to the current directory ".".

Reviewer: > This is not a good idea as the oci image layout folder structure will mess the current working directory.

This is valid concern. I agree with you that `--output` should be required.

When backup an entire repo, I would vote for option 5 as the default behavior, i.e. making full repository name as a tarball. For portability and storage efficiency, using a tarball file is generally better, especially for disaster recovery backups, uploading backup to blob storage, moving repositories across machines, and less storage space.

Folders are helpful for temporary, local work or modification but not recommended for backups intended for storage or transfer.

In addition, ORAS should also allow users can also customize the name of the folder or tarball file.

> > - If the flag `--output` is not specified, the default output directory is set to the current directory ".".

Author: In my version of the document, `--output` was required. I guess you changed that. I think option 1 is the simplist all the other options don't make sense with different registries and repositories.

> > - If the flag `--output` is not specified, the default output directory is set to the current directory ".".

Author: Already have multiple registries working it took no effort

> > - The file extension determines the output format. If the user does not provide an extension and output is a folder path, it defaults to directory. For the edge case on Windows terminal, oras should prompt users that if specify a ".tar" extention oras will generate a tarball file instead of a folder path.

Reviewer: For the frist iteration, I would recommend `oras` to start with supporting `.tar` as the file extension to indicate tarball. Other compression file formats like `.tar.gz` and `.zip` could be considered in the future.
- OCI and Docker ecosystem uses `.tar`. Tools like `docker save/load` rely on tarball. This is considered for interoperability with Docker and OCI.
- `.zip`poorly preserves Unix file permissions, symbolic links, etc.,
- `.tar.gz` is not random readable

* `--username <string>`: Username for authenticating to the registry.
* `--password <string>`: Password for authenticating to the registry.
* `--password-stdin`: Read password from stdin.
* `--identity-token <string>`: Use bearer token for authentication.
* `--identity-token-stdin`: Read identity token from stdin.
* `--ca-file <path>`: Path to custom CA certificate file.
* `--cert-file <path>`: Path to client TLS certificate file.
* `--key-file <path>`: Path to client private key file.
* `--resolve <host:port:address[:address_port]>`: Customized DNS for registry.
* `--debug`: Output debug logs (implies `--no-tty`).
* `--no-tty`: Disable progress bars.oras

#### Command: `oras restore`

**Short summary:**
Restore OCI artifacts or images from a local OCI image layout or archive into a registry.

**Syntax:**
```bash
oras restore [flags] <registry>/<repository>[:<ref1>[,<ref2>...]] [...]
```

**Output:**
Artifacts are uploaded to the target registry/registries as specified.

**New flags:**

`--input <path>`: Source folder or archive file.
`--exclude-referrers`: Restore the image from backup without the referrers

> > Note: If the flag `--output` is not specified, the default input directory is set to the current directory ".".

Reviewer: To keep a consistent behavior between `oras back` and `oras restore`, I would recommend `oras restore --input` to start with supporting `.tar` as the file extension to indicate tarball.  https://github.com/oras-project/oras/pull/1610#discussion_r2181029487

* `--password-stdin`: Read password from stdin.
* `--identity-token <string>`: Use bearer token for authentication.
* `--identity-token-stdin`: Read identity token from stdin.
* `--ca-file <path>`: Path to custom CA certificate file.
* `--cert-file <path>`: Path to client TLS certificate file.
* `--key-file <path>`: Path to client private key file.
* `--resolve <host:port:address[:address_port]>`: Customized DNS for registry.
* `--debug`: Output debug logs (implies `--no-tty`).
* `--distribution-spec string`: [Preview] set OCI distribution spec version and API option for target. Options: v1.1-referrers-tag, v1.1-referrers-api
* `--no-tty`: Disable progress bars.

### User Experience in the CLI

**Backup and Restore Multiple Repositories and Tagged Artifacts**

```bash
# Backup a repository from a registry to a local compressed tarball
oras backup --include-referrers registry.acme.com/repo:v1 --output multi-backup.tar

# Transfer the backup file to new environment (e.g., via USB or secured media)

# Restore images and referrer artifacts from a local backup file to a target registry
oras restore registry.backup.com/repo:v1  --input multi-backup.tar 

> ```

Author: Already have multi repo and multi-registry working it is not difficult without that back of restore is pointless
